import { makeArticleLayout } from '../../components/article_layout';
import { BarChart } from '../../components/bar_chart';
import { DoughnutChart } from '../../components/doughnut_chart';
import { YouTubeEmbed } from '../../components/embed';
import { translationProps } from '../../lib/translations';

export const meta = {
  title: 'Variance in Commander',
  publishDate: 'Jan 18 2023',
  description: 'How do we calculate variance in a game of Magic?',
};

**What is variance?** The meaning of the word differs in colloquial language and
statistics, but the intersection of these meanings is essentially this: if an
outcome is high variance, it will be hard to predict exactly what the outcome
will be. In _Magic: The Gathering_, a high variance game will play out
differently every time. A high variance deck could either describe a deck with
high variance in its strength (it draws either good or bad hands, not average
hands) or high variance in its play patterns (different hands generate very
different play experiences and board states). An example of the first would be a
deck like **Goblin Charbelcher** in Modern or Legacy: you have hands that can
turbo out a Charbelcher or you don’t. On the other hand, Burn is a low variance
deck in terms of strength, as many of the cards are functionally equivalent.
Adaptive midrange or control decks can be high variance in terms of gameplay, as
cards tend to play very different roles, while decks with a very specific game
plan tend to be low variance in gameplay (Belcher is also good example of this,
which illustrates how a deck can be low variance in one way and high variance in
another).

**How do we calculate variance in a game of Magic?** Variance in your win
percentage is straight-forward! You get to use the same math any gambler would
(**Krark** players: take note!). If you win 50% of the time, your chance of
winning is the same as flipping a fair coin, which is the highest variance type
of bet. Even though you win the flip 50% of the time, you don’t get a half win
each time—you only see both extremes, win or lose. Variance is calculated as the
average (or expected) squared difference between an outcome and the average
outcome. The square root of that, the standard deviation, is usually more
intuitive. If you win a dollar whenever you win the flip, and lose a dollar
whenever you lose, you know in the long run you’ll break even, but the standard
deviation is one dollar since you will always either gain or lose a dollar every
flip. How many flips to be confident you’ll break even? We can estimate the
standard error, which is the standard deviation divided by the square root of
the number of flips. If you flip 100 coins, the standard error is 10 cents—you
aren’t guaranteed to break even, but on average you should be within 10 cents.
Note: this is just an average, and averages can be very misleading. Since you
always win or lose a dollar, you can never be up or down 10 cents. In this case,
we’re averaging over lots of outcomes—breaking even, up/down a dollar, up/down
two dollars, etc.—and it’s simply the case that you will most likely break even,
so the standard error is nearly 0.

For a weighted coin, the outcome has lower variance. You will either win more
often or lose more often, and because there are only two outcomes, you can
predict which of the two is more likely as long as you know how the coin is
weighted. What this also means is that as you improve your win percentage, it
will become more and more obvious! Your variance can only go down, regardless if
you’re better or worse than 50%.

**How do we calculate the variance of Commander games?** Overall, you could
imagine Commander is just a weighted coin flip: each player has a 25% chance to
win and 75% chance to lose. Ironically, this means that as you increase that win
rate towards 50%, the variance increases! Because of this, it’s really hard to
know if you’re increasing your win rate without playing a lot of games!

Say you play 10 games and win 4—is your true win percentage 25%, 40%, or 50%?
This outcome is fairly likely for all those win rates, and we can explicitly
calculate the likelihood of winning 4 games based on some hypothetical win
rates. If p is the probability of your record, and we’ve played N games and won
M times, we can calculate p as as a function of your true win rate:

![win rate equation](/article_variance_equation.png)

There’s one additional trick here that may not be familiar if you haven’t taken
a probability class, the term

<img src="/article_variance_nm.png" alt="n m" className="m-0 inline" />. There
are many sequences of games that amount to a 4-6 record. We need another term,
called the binomial coefficient, which counts the number of possible ways to
have won N games out of M total games, and that’s <img
  src="/article_variance_nm.png"
  alt="n m"
  className="m-0 inline"
/>. This is actually part of what makes being confident about records near 50% even
more difficult to nail down; there’s a lot of ways to win half your games and lose
half your games, so the probability of those types of records are a bit inflated,
regardless of your true win rate.

We can now compute some probabilities. The probability of 4 wins and 6 loses if
you have a true win rate of 25% is 0.15. That means you’d expect this type of
record about 15% of the time. If your true win rate is 40%, you’d expect this
record slightly more often—about 25% of the time. If your true win rate is 50%,
you’d expect the outcome about 20% of the time. Notice that these probabilities
aren’t all that different; there isn’t one clear winner. In statistics, we often
use an approach called maximum likelihood estimation (MLE): the most likely win
rate is the win rate that maximizes the likelihood of the observed result. In
this case, among win rates of 25%, 40%, and 50%, 40% is the maximum likelihood
estimate.

But being the maximum likelihood estimate isn’t sufficient on its own to get a
clear understanding of your win rate and variance! You need to always ask how
confident you are in your estimate. There are technical ways to compute the
error on your maximum likelihood estimate that requires thinking about
derivatives, but I’ll spare you the calculus. Ultimately, as long as the
likelihood of your maximum likelihood estimate isn’t that much more likely than
the alternatives, you’re not very confident. In the example above, the result
isn’t even twice as likely at a 40% win rate when compared to a 25% win rate.

After 100 games, you’d end up with a much bigger difference. If you won 40
games, the probability of that outcome with a true 25% win rate would only be
0.0004, whereas the probability of that outcome with a true 40% win rate would
be 0.08! That’s 200x more likely, so while the maximum likelihood estimate is
still 40%, you’re over 100x more confident after 100 games than you were after
10 games.

As you can see, you need to play a lot of games if you want to see if your win
rate has actually improved over 25%. There’s an approach to decide how many
games you should play to have a certain level of confidence, called power
analysis, but I’ll spare you those details. Ultimately, you need to play a match
up a large number of times, much more than 10, to have a confident estimate in
your win rate.

**How does Commander’s variance compare to the variance of 1v1 Magic formats?**
Let’s return to the example of 4 wins and 6 losses. Again, if your true win rate
is 40%, you’d expect this record slightly more often—about 25% of the time. If
your true win rate is 50%, you’d expect the outcome about 20% of the time. The
40% win rate is about 1.25x more likely than your baseline 50% win rate.
Naively, you might think the 4-6 record is less informative in 1v1 then in
Commander, given in Commander you’d know the 40% win rate is 1.67x more likely
than your baseline 25% win rate. However, there’s a few reasons why that’s
misleading.

First, a 40% win rate in Commander is much more impressive than a 40% win rate
is disappointing in 1v1, so the comparison isn’t really fair. In Commander,
you’ve increased your win rate by 15 points, whereas in 1v1 you’ve only
decreased it by 10 points. As a percentage change in your win rate, it’s also
much larger in Commander than in 1v1. You will largely need to worry about
detecting smaller changes in your win rate, and small changes require a large
number of games. With 10 games, you can’t ever score an exact win rate of 25%,
and you’ll almost always (unconfidently) believe your win rate is 30% or 20%
when your true win rate is really 25%. Even with 20 games, your most likely
options are 20%, 25%, and 30%, and only once you get to 40 games do you get some
granularity—22.5% and 27.5% win rates, which amount to a 10% change in the
baseline, are now options. In the same number of games, 1v1 players can resolve
changes half as small!

Second, unlike in 1v1 Magic, where you may have a dozen match ups you need to
care about, in Commander you have much more. We can go back to the binomial
coefficient to estimate just how many. The lower bound is that each opponent in
your four player pod plays a unique deck, so we need to calculate , where N is
the number of decks and M is the number of opponents. In 1v1, if there are 10
decks, there are 10 match ups, or 20 if you consider whether or not you’re on
the play or the draw. In Commander, there are 120! Factoring in seat order, you
have at least 2880! While not all match ups are equally likely, and while you
might be able to ignore pods composed of only rarely-played decks, you have
orders of magnitude more win rates to estimate, and each estimate is going to
take a lot of games. The secret to solving this problem is using inference; you
should learn something about playing a match in first seat from playing it in
fourth, and you should learn something about playing combo decks in general from
each combo deck you play against. Just like in machine learning / artificial
intelligence research, the real strength comes from a player’s ability to
generalize from the data they have on the matches they’ve played to matches
they’ve never played before, and that’s an issue of player skill and knowledge.

Third, because of the first two points, no Commander tournament outcome is going
to be strongly consistent with your long term win rate in the true metagame, so
all the work you need to do to be confident in your performance can easily be
for naught. In 1v1, you may see a bad match-up a little too often in an 8 round
tournament, and rightfully attribute doing poorly to your bad luck. In
Commander, there are almost always less rounds, and now orders of magnitude more
match-ups. The best you can hope for is good luck, hitting more than one pod
where you’re at an advantage. You will almost never experience a
“representative” tournament. This is fully ignoring the impact of Swiss
pairings—which will push more and more people to observing win rates close to
the baseline. This means you’re more likely to observe a lower win rate in a
tournament with Swiss rounds than in your practice games (unless you practice
via Swiss tournaments, which 1v1 players can do rather easily on MTGO and
Arena).

Lastly, when it comes to testing changes to your deck list, the singleton rule
is a statistical killer. If I want to swap one set of a 4-of for another 4-of in
Legacy, I can get a feel for the swap quickly because I am very likely to draw
the new 4-of from my 60 card deck in any given game. In Commander, swapping one
card for another may not have an impact for a long time; most of your games will
not provide any data on the impact of the swap. Only the games in which the card
shows up matter, and unless it’s a card you will frequently tutor for, that
won’t be a large percentage of your games. This is why it can be so difficult to
decide if a swap of a removal spell, mana rock, or counterspell for different
versions of the same effect is having an impact. The games when you draw the new
card are few, and the games when the new card meaningfully differs from the card
it’s replacing will be even fewer. Even if one is objectively better, it could
take thousands of games to be sure.

**What does Commander’s variance ultimately mean for its players?** It is
unfortunately very difficult for a Commander player to estimate their true win
rate in a blind metagame, and it’s especially difficult to understand how those
win rates will change as you make single card swaps in your list.

Your best bet is to get very good at the inference component of the game:
determining how to play in a given pod given your past experiences with your
deck. You also need to gather as much diverse data as possible, so that your
inferences can cover as many situations as possible. While it may be very
difficult to predict what your win rate in a given tournament will be, you’re
able to increase the likelihood that you can navigate a given tournament to your
deck’s maximum potential by understanding how to play the pod given the deck
you’ve brought. It will also let you predict how a single card swap may affect
game play better, so that you can be more confident about swaps without having
to accumulate an absurd amount of data with each new set release.

export default makeArticleLayout(meta);

export const getStaticProps = translationProps(['common']);
